# Future research directions

This research has indicated a number of areas where more evidence is needed regarding educational dialogue, oTPD, enabling sustainable communities of practice, and a combination therein including the research methodologies and approaches to study these areas. This section offers a summary of recommended directions for future research.

Dialogue within online networks, forums and communities of practice stands to be significantly better understood. Frequency counting was used to analyse forum engagement for this study, however this will be built on and the forum contributions from the ‘Fundamentals of Educational Dialogue’ course will be analysed using the Scheme for Educational Dialogue Analysis (SEDA) by the same working paper group that co-authored Case Study 2. This is in order to better understand the types of dialogue taking place and any changes in dialogic moves throughout the duration of the course, particularly one that is theory-driven with reflective activities embedded throughout. Studies that incorporate other methodologies to analyse online dialogue, for example corpus linguistics, would also be valuable additions to the evidence base.

oTPD requires significantly more evidence to better understand the ways in which it can be designed for equitable access and to maximise sustainable impact. There is a lot to be desired for addressing accessibility barriers in oTPD and future research should prioritise this, as well as broader barriers to participation and completion. This should include a more significant sample of the real, lived experiences from participants undertaking oTPD, particularly those from marginalised contexts. Further research would also benefit from more detailed experiences following oTPD participants after they have had time to reconstruct knowledge from the course and the ways in which this manifests in their perceptions and practices. More data is needed, particularly as it relates to classroom-level impact as well as institutional and community-level support. This should also include the role of the course facilitator and the potential to reduce scaffolding through using ‘champions’ and local facilitators to sustain communities of practice. The role of the local facilitator in general requires more evidence regarding intended and unintended or catalytic impact.

Research regarding educator communities of practice is also required, which explores the sustainability and impact of such networks. An understanding of the extent to which and how these communities are engaged with by different users is essential, alongside design principles for maximising collective knowledge construction and reconstruction through dialogue and impact. Wider continued critical exploration of how oTPD can offer support for the formation and sustainability of teacher communities of practice is necessary to adjust and build on the design principles from this research.

In addition to the above, evidence regarding the methods and approaches to research in these areas is needed. This is particularly the case for big data and the ways in which it needs to be triangulated to elicit meaningful insights of participants' experiences in oTPD. Successes were particularly seen in this study through utilising collaborative research with the working paper group that co-authored Case Study 2. This allowed for a dialogic process of research that I believe resulted in higher quality research products. Through continuous reflection into my biases and framework and how these have influenced the stories I have shared in this dissertation, it has become very clear that the sector needs further evidence from alternative perspectives of those who have implemented online learning in international contexts. Collective research and ongoing dialogue between researchers and practitioners alike can strengthen the evidence.

# Concluding remarks

This research study offers important areas of further consideration, particularly since new technology-focused professional development programmes and pilots are launching through a number of initiatives globally. Across this landscape, the role of technology to support teacher professional development requires further robust research to be better understood. It is the desire for this research to be built on in future studies in order to provide more equitable, engaging and impactful oTPD opportunities.

There is certainly no shortage of work to be done and research to be undertaken, however numerous positive results came out of this research indicating the growth we have achieved as a sector. Technology is a constant in the education domain (in every domain!), and this will not change any time soon. When thinking about the future of oTPD, the sector needs to consider models that are viable over the long term. The business model of MOOCs is clearly problematic and struggles with issues regarding sustainability. Therefore, the pedagogy should continue to be of central focus in the delivery of technology-enhanced professional learning.

The journey of undertaking this research has been complex and challenging, yet entirely rewarding. The learning that has come from this study is both personal and collective, as I continue to work with individuals I have met along the way. This has been transformational and helped me reflect on my role as a researcher and the interaction between research and practice. I am deeply grateful for this experience, and look forward to continuing to build evidence in this important area of research.
