### Course 1: The Fundamentals of Educational Dialogue

Course 1 was designed for educators who are interested in learning about the foundational theories behind educational dialogue - both for participants new to educational dialogue as well as ones who wished to refresh their knowledge. This course was designed collaboratively by myself and [Farah Ahmed](https://www.educ.cam.ac.uk/people/staff/ahmed_farah/), a Leverhulme Early Career Research Fellow at the Faculty of Education, University of Cambridge. Farah co-convenes the ‘Cultural, religious and philosophical traditions in educational dialogue’ strand of the CEDiR group. The project for which she used this course as an opportunity for data collection is: Rethinking Islamic education for British Muslim children: a philosophical investigation of dialogue in Islamic educational theory and an empirical study trialling dialogic pedagogy in UK madrasahs (supplementary schools). Farah is a member of the T-SEDA development team and has extensive experience in professional development for dialogic pedagogy and practice.

The aims of this 6-week fundamentals course were to:
1. Introduce participants to the key theorists, methodologies and debates in the field of educational dialogue across all phases of education
2. Equip participants to reflect on their own thinking about dialogic pedagogy and practices in their contexts
3. Prepare participants for further courses within the series that support systematic reflective inquiry into their practice

The content for Course 1 focused on the different theories and perspectives on educational dialogue in order to develop participants’ thinking about their own classroom practices. The course content drew heavily on what was already produced and evidenced, including some of the existing workshop materials and short videos devised by the T-SEDA Collective.

**Week 1**, ‘An introduction to educational dialogue’, focused on understanding the distinction between educational dialogue and classroom talk as well as the relationship of dialogue to thinking and learning. It also looked at how dialogue differs from oracy and the relationship between the two. An overview of terminology was provided as well as an outline of the development of dialogic educational theories and practices. 

**Week 2**, ‘Robin Alexander - Taking a dialogic stance’, explored the ways in which attending to classroom ethos can support educators and learners to take a dialogic stance. It explored how subscribing to core dialogic principles might enable educators to develop a range of repertoires to facilitate teaching and learning.

**Week 3**, ‘Neil Mercer - Interthinking through exploratory talk’, built on the notion of taking a ‘dialogic stance’, by exploring the mechanisms of how thinking happens and is developed through dialogue. Neil Mercer’s use of the term ‘interthinking’ was explored to explain how dialogue enables knowledge and understanding to be co-constructed, in particular through learners working in groups. Interthinking was also discussed, including how it can be mediated through technology.

**Week 4**, ‘Sara Hennessy - Visualising classroom dialogue through dialogic moves’ presented research that enables educators to ‘see’ and evaluate the quality of classroom dialogue through identifying dialogic moves. These are descriptors that qualify what kind of statement has been made. They are used by educational researchers to understand what types of dialogic practices and moves support learning.

**Week 5**, ‘Rupert Wegerif - Opening up a dialogic space for reflection and agency’ focused on expanding understandings of dialogic education by looking at the concepts of dialogic space and dialogic self. This built on the content from Weeks 2, 3, and 4 and asked participants to reflect on how these dialogic ideas might affect how they think about their classroom spaces, and the learners within them. They were asked to consider why it might be useful and important to ‘widen’ and ‘deepen’ dialogue, how learners can be supported to make connections within their learning and with wider knowledge, how dialogue can support creativity, cultural literacy and intercultural understanding, and how to give learners agency and encourage reflection.

**Week 6**, ‘Paulo Freire and Ramón Flecha - Transformative, holistic and decolonial approaches to dialogue’, was the final week in which Paulo Freire’s conceptualisation of dialogic pedagogy was discussed. This week also explored how Freire’s ideas have been picked up by Ramón Flecha and operationalised in schools worldwide. We built on one of the core questions from the previous week: Is dialogue a ‘western’ idea? In this final week of the course, participants were invited to continue their learning journey through further MOOCs in the series.
